### Explainable Multi-ethnic and Independent representation learning for Type 2 Diabetes Risk Factor Discovery by integrating genetic and non-genetic data from the UKBiobank



Health Disparities research is gaining attention in recent times due to its impact on the healthcare system and the government. Billions of dollars is spent yearly by the U.S Government due to lack of health equity. Precision medicine is the goal of genomic research in the 21st Century where genetic alphabets can be translated to the bedside for each patient. While precision medicine in itself is expensive, health equity is the Shunt-pathway to individualized medicine. Knowing health disparities between groups will enable population groups to know the risk and protective factors associated with that particular group, this in turn will lead to personalized medicine where each individual will strive to improve the quality of their lives. Hence, health equity is cheaper and will save billions of U.S Dollars while improving the quality of life for all. Interpretable AI in the context of health disparities is an indispensable tool to achieve health equity.

Artificial Intelligence has continued to contribute to healthcare research. Deepmind's AlphaFold for predicting the 3D structure of proteins from amino acid sequences is a clear example of how AI can be utilized for good to diagnose and cure human diseases. Recently, DeepMind took a step further to develop a new model from its pre-trained model (AlphaFold) called AphaMissense, this is capable of transforming genomic medicine research. AphaMissense is capable of predicting millions of genetic variants (missense mutations), this will revolutionize genomic medicine research and pave the way for improved diagnosis and drug discovery.
Linear regression/mediation analysis have been applied in computational epidemiology over the past decades. Due to lack of algorithm complexity and Explainable, machine learning algorithms (Tree-Based models & Deep neural network) which have complex architectures have shown promise in Explaining black box models, we aim to achieve this in this research.

We aim at using the genetic & environmental data from the All of Us database to predict health disparities risk factors between population groups. Nature vs Nurture, the concept that genetics loads the gun but the environment pulls the trigger is gaining attention in precision medicine research. Gene environment interaction in public health has remained a debate topic among Geneticists & Environmental science researchers. Results from previous studies have shown a strong gene environment interaction in human diseases. Epigenetics on the other hand is enabling researchers to quantify these modifiable DNA changes due to lifestyle factors, demographic, clinical parameters, etc.
In this research, we shall develop Explainable AI models to predict health disparities risk factors in the All of Us Database in the U.S while also gaining insights into the protective factors. We shall use Shapley Values (SHAP) to stratify the self-identified groups & interpret the results for public health use.
